:WEP-Number: 0001
:Created: 2020-01-13
:Last-Modified: 2020-01-13
:Author: Sasha Romijn
:Status: Draft 

WEP1 - Opportunity Grant policy for Write the Docs conferences
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Abstract
========

This WEP proposes a policy for offering opportunity grants (known as
financial aid in some other events) for Write the Docs conferences.

Motivation
==========

Write the Docs conferences sometimes support speakers and attendees
with their travel and accommodation costs. There is currently no
structural policy for this, and this WEP intends to define a clear
process for offering and processing grants.

Proposal
========

Overview
--------

Write the Docs conferences can offer grants to attendees and speakers.
The possibilities depend on the available budget, which may be different
per conference.

Some important considerations apply to grants:

* There are generally more applications than funds available, so there must
  be a process to prioritise grant allocation.
* People can be reluctant, or even feel shameful about applying, so the process
  for applications should be encouraging and welcoming, even for people who
  feel they might not deserve it.
* Grants improve access for marginalized and underrepresented groups already,
  but an option can be to prioritise marginalized groups in allocations.
  Currently, this proposal is written with prioritisation of marginalized and
  underrepresented groups.

Speakers
--------

Accepted speakers are an essential part of the conference, and should
therefore have a special grant priority. All speakers and organisers will
receive a free ticket, as they already pay for their participation in the
conference with their volunteer time.

If speakers would like to request a (partial) grant for further costs,
they fill in the normal grant application form. The speaker acceptance
email will include a mention of the grant program and form.

Grants for speakers follow the regular process for assignment and handling,
except that they are prioritized over all other grant applications.

Regular grant requests
----------------------

(Prospective) attendees can request a grant through an application form.
Other than typical details like their name (both legal and preferred),
and contact details, the form should ask roughly these questions:

* What they do with documentation
* Why they want to attend Write the Docs
* An estimate for their costs (provide tips for looking on booking, airbnb,
  google flights and possibly others), split out by cost item.
  Travel and accommodation are typical costs, but applicants may specify
  and ask for any costs they need covered to be able to attend, like childcare.
* Which country they live in
* Any other comments/information
* Whether they are part of an underrepresented or marginalized group in tech

The form should mention that upon notification, accepted applicants will 
have one week to confirm. If that is difficult, the applicant should clarify
that in the form.

For the last question, we will clarify that underrepresented or marginalized 
groups in tech include, but are not limited to:

* women and other gender minorities of all expressions and identities;
  e.g. trans, agender and non-binary people
* people of color
* sexuality minorities, including asexual people
* people with disabilities, both visible and invisible
* neurodivergent people
* people with chronic illnesses or diseases
* religious and ethnic minorities
* age minorities (under ~21, over ~50)
* people experiencing poverty
* homeless and home/food insecure people
* caregivers of children or other dependents
* people who have experienced trauma and its aftermath (PTSD, anxiety, etc)
* people living with or recovering from substance abuse

Notably, applicants are never asked to identify which group they belong to.

Selection process
-----------------

All applications will be scored by the grant review team, which should
consist of around four reviewers. The suggested tool is Grorg, but the
grant review team may choose different tools.

Reviewers can go through all applications one by one, and score them,
possibly with a comment. Scores, applicant names, and comments from others
should not be shown until the reviewer has provided a score. Scores can be
updated, but these updates will be logged and visible.

The scoring should be based on the overall impact that granting this person
will have on them, the Write the Docs community, and the applicants wider
community and country, compared to others.
This is difficult to assess from a short form. Several guidelines are:

* To what extent will letting this person attend have a further impact on the
  community? For example, someone who essentially wrote “I will help my
  company make more money” should likely be scored lower than someone who is
  active in their local community.
* The social impact of their work can be a part too. “I work to help this
  bank I work for become richer” has less social impact than supporting someone
  who said “I work on projects to help addicted homeless people towards recovery”,
  and therefore the latter should be scored higher.
* Where is this person from? Especially if they would take a large budget, but 
  travel to a different Write the Docs conference would be much closer and/or cheaper,
  that should be the preferred option. For example, an applicant from Germany
  should generally apply for Prague instead of Portland.
* Are they making a basic effort? For example, if someone doesn't even have an
  estimate of the price of their flight without further explanation, they don't
  appear very motivated.
* Does this conference seem like an event that would benefit them? And do
  they have some understanding of what the conference is about?

After all scores are completed, the grant review team will discuss the top
applications, prioritized by underrepresented/marginalized groups first,
score second, and grant them unless discussion leads to another conclusion,
until funds run out. The review team is not required to always follow the
score based order. This also depends on the remaining resources.

Speakers will bypass the review process and are immediately accepted, except
in exceptional circumstances.

Notifying accepted applicants
-----------------------------

* All accepted applicants will be notified by the grant review team.
* Applicants need to confirm they are still intending to participate
  within one week. This term can be extended if requested in the
  application.
* If they withdraw their application, the grant review team may be able
  provide a few extra applicants with grants, prioritized by score.
* Applicants that are very low on the list, and basically certain not to
  receive a grant, will be notified by the grant review team as soon as
  the selection is complete.
* When all accepted applicants are confirmed, the remaining not accepted
  applicants will be notified too.

Handling grants and funds
-------------------------

* Accepted applicants are encouraged to complete their bookings as soon
  as possible.
* Some may need to request a visa. In that case, the grant review team
  should stress that they should not book non-refundable travel or
  accommodation until their visa is confirmed. Upon request, an invitation
  letter will be provided, which should mention that costs are covered
  by the conference, as this can help with the visa application.
* Applicants need to provide booking confirmations for their costs.
  Upon receipt of the confirmations (which need to match their legal name),
  their costs will be refunded as soon as possible (within a few weeks).
  There may be costs involved in these transfers, which should be covered
  by the conference.
* In circumstances where it is not realistically possible, or prohibitively
  expensive, to transfer the funds, the refund can happen at the conference.
  This should be an exceptional case though, as not everyone can afford to
  miss these funds so long.
* In very exceptional circumstances, transfers may be made before booking
  confirmations are received. This applies to people that simply can not
  get the funds together to pay themselves in advance. This requires at least:
  - Complete details of what expense needs to be made and what for
  - Being a known member in the community, or a known and well trusted
    community member vouching for the applicant.
  Transfers of funds before booking confirmations are received are always
  at the discretion of the conference organisers.
* An alternative option is for conference organisers to pay for or book
  expenses directly. This should be an exception, not the rule.
* If people are unable to make it to the conference for reasons reasonably 
  outside of their influence, for e.g. health reasons or because they are
  unable to pass immigration despite their visa, their grant will be honoured,
  but if some of their costs are still cancellable/refundable, they should 
  cancel those and refund the conference for those costs.
  Note that it may not always be possible for an applicant to prove why they
  were not able to attend.

Assistance with accommodation
-----------------------------

Many grants will include funding for accommodation. It is possible to have
recipients book their own accommodation, but an alternative is for the
conference to assist with this. Organisers may be better informed on
affordable places to stay, and booking multiple rooms may make discounts
possible. This can range from organisers booking accommodation for grant
recipients, to providing tips on places to stay.

In either case, the amount granted for accommodation can be adjusted to
match reasonable available options.

Organisers can suggest that grant recipients share space, but recipients
should never feel pressured to accept a shared room, and should not be asked
to explain their choice not to share a room.

Unexpected additional costs
---------------------------

Sometimes grant recipients need additional funding due to changed
circumstances, or due to unexpected incidental costs incurred during the
conference.

Accepted grant recipients that encounter these additional costs that cause
difficulties for them, can ask the conference to cover costs in addition to
their grant. This is at the discretion of local conference organisers in
coordination with the grant review team.

Other important conditions
--------------------------

* Under no condition should the organisers allow others to know who has
  received a grant, without the recipient’s consent. Only anonymous data
  will be shared otherwise. Grant recipients are free to share that they
  have received a grant, but never required to.
* The conference should never ask people which underrepresented group they
  belong to, because it can exclude people in situations where this endangers
  their safety. This also does not help in preventing fraud, so there is no
  reason to do it.
* If volunteers are needed, grant recipients may be a good first place to ask.
  However, this shouldn’t be so much that it actually ends up limiting their
  conference experience. Grant recipients should never be made to feel that
  they are expected to volunteer because they received a grant.

Other possible choices
----------------------

* We could decide to only pay out grants at the conference. The upside of this
  is that it excludes fraud and no shows. The downside is that it makes it much
  harder for some people, especially the more underrepresented, to pay all the
  costs in advance, due to the long time it takes until their refund.
  This particularly affects people that need these grants the most.
* A middle ground could be to default to paying at the conference, but allow 
  exceptions (this would have to be communicated clearly). That would however 
  require people to basically send a mail saying “I’m too poor for this” which 
  can be really uncomfortable. In any case, such a model would still need 
  exemptions for people who did make non-refundable costs, but were unable 
  to actually make it due to issues outside of their control, like illness 
  or being rejected at the border.
* We could decide not to bias towards underrepresented groups.

Other notes
-----------

Travel and accommodation for conference organisers are not in scope of
this policy.

Copyright
=========

This document is published under the `Creative Commons CC-BY 4.0 Attribution <https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/>`_ license.
